---
title: "Versus Mode: Owners vs. Workers"
---
The recent round of layoffs at Activision-Blizzard and elsewhere have made it
all too clear that **game industry bosses are prioritizing short-term profit
over the health and livelihoods of workers**. CEOs like Bobby Kotick are
rewarded for treating workers as disposable, even when those same workers help
to generate record revenue for the company. No matter how well the company is
doing, shareholders and executives never seem to be satisfied, and are
constantly searching for new ways to cut costs and boost profits, often at the
expense of workers. Why does this keep happening? To better understand it, we
need to look past the PR and into how the ownership of these companies is
structured, where the profits go, and where decision-making power actually lies.

<div class="md-img left off-1">
<img
  src="/images/dangeroustogoalone_organize.png"
  alt="It's dangerous to go alone! Organize!"
  style="width:200px;max-width:100%"
/>
</div>

**Any business is above all made up of its workers**: they are the ones who are
actually producing what the business sells, and whose labour is the source of
its profits. But who do these profits go to? Not to them, but rather to those
who happen to own the company: the shareholders. Large publicly-traded
corporations can have millions of shareholders, and while some companies can be
owned by a single business owner, even tiny startups typically have outside
investors as shareholders beyond the original founders.

To shareholders, all that the business represents is a source of profit, either
through the business itself increasing in value, or through money dividends.
**Shareholders might not have any real connection to the company** or even care
about what it does, let alone care about the welfare of its workers. They have
money, and they buy shares because they want this money to grow into more money,
without doing any work for it. (Creating this additional value does take work,
but that work is done by workers like you and me, not by them.)

> Jorgensen says the shuttering [of Visceral] was **purely a business
> decision..**. "You've got to cut the bridge when you realize you can't really
> make a lot of money on something, so that's the decision we made."

<div class="md-attribution">
&#x2014;
<a href="https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/310630/EA_Viscerals_canned_Star_Wars_project_too_linear_for_modern_tastes.php">
Gamasutra speaking to EA CFO Blake Jorgensen on the reasons for Visceral Studios' closure
</a>
</div>

The main way shareholders exercise control over corporations is through
elections of the board of directors. Shareholders leverage the amount of voting
shares they have to influence board elections, making the board directly
accountable to them. Executive officers like the CEO are appointed by the board
of directors, directly linking management, the board, and shareholders.
Management ultimately only answers to the board of directors, and the board of
directors answers to shareholders and shareholders only.  **They have no
accountability to the workers.**

Legislation varies, but CEOs have "fiduciary duty" to the shareholders, which
effectively means that they are **legally required** to maximize profits. They
can even be sued for putting ethical concerns above the duty of increasing value
for shareholders! Not that they need the extra motivation: upper management's
loyalty to shareholders is usually ensured by granting them shares as
compensation, as well as large bonuses tied to company profits.

Shareholders always have the option to sell their shares and buy into a
different company, so if a business doesn't perform well enough in terms of
profits in the short-term, the value of the shares decreases. The consequence is
that businesses are not merely driven to make a profit, but to make the
**highest possible profit** in the short-term, over anything else. And one of
the main ways of increasing profits is to minimize expenses such as salaries to
workers, which is why the mass layoffs keep recurring. Studios can hire a bunch
of game developers as work ramps up on a large project, make them crunch
unreasonable hours to get it released as fast as possible, then lay off most of
them after sales start coming in to ensure that salary expenses are minimized
and profits kept as high as possible. **This isn't "bad management." It's the
system working as designed.** Executives make decisions for the benefit of the
owners at the expense of the rest of us.

This is why we also typically see share value increase after every round of
layoffs, as happened recently with Activision Blizzard: when mass layoffs get
announced, management is sending a message to shareholders that they are willing
to do what it takes to ensure ever-increasing profits **no matter what**, and
this makes company shares more attractive on the market. Shareholders are
thrilled! They get richer, and the rest of us get poorer. That's why the
decision is made in the first place, not out of any real necessity, despite how
they try to spin it to the workers.

<div class="md-img off-2">
<img
  src="/images/skeleton.svg"
  alt="Skeleton in bathtub"
/>
</div>

It's not a question of "good bosses" vs "bad bosses." **Workers and owners have
fundamentally different interests.** Most of the things that benefit workers —
higher wages, shorter working hours, better benefits, job security, a safer work
environment — also cut into company profits. In short, **every dollar that goes
to your wage is a dollar that doesn't go to the owners**. In order to maximize
profit, many bosses will try and squeeze as much labour as possible out of their
workforce while keeping wages as low as possible. Long periods of unpaid
overtime are common in the game industry in part because bosses have (so far)
been able to get away with it, despite laws that make unpaid overtime illegal in
many countries.

Often bosses justify this treatment by arguing that anyone who complains just
isn't "passionate" enough. But selective appeals to passion are just another
strategy to wring more out of workers who just want to be able to make games
sustainably and hone their craft without burning out. Unlike workers, **owners
and bosses don't actually care about making the best game possible**. Their
first priority is to make money — and right now they're the ones calling the
shots, without any accountability to the people *actually making the game*.

<div class="md-img right">
<img
  src="/images/turnleft.svg"
  alt="Turn Left sign"
/>
</div>

But it doesn't have to be this way! Workers have the potential power to change
this dynamic and to force the businesses they work for to take their best
interests into consideration too. This is because in every industry, every
business, it's always their labour that is the source of all the owners'
profits. **When it comes down to it, it's owners who need the workers, not the
other way around.** Isolated from each other, workers are completely vulnerable
to the whims of management, as they are devalued and reduced to having to beg
for better conditions — but united and organized, workers can build the leverage
to actually negotiate with management from a position of power. **Unionizing is
the only way to tip the balance in the other direction** and create a better
game industry for all workers!

Beyond this, **we can also imagine an entirely different way of structuring the
industry** — one that would not fundamentally rely on the exploitation of
workers for the benefit of shareholders. This is what workers' cooperatives aim
to do: they are businesses with no external shareholders that are entirely and
collectively owned by all the workers who work there themselves, allowing them
to earn the full benefit of their labour. (Check the section on worker co-ops
later in the zine!)
